RFC 0011: Extending API Docs (#11)
crystal-lang/rfcs: text/0011-extending-api-docs.md

- Feature Name: extending-api-docs
- Start Date: 2024-11-14
- RFC PR: [crystal-lang/rfcs#11](https://github.com/crystal-lang/rfcs/pull/11)
- Issue: [crystal-lang/crystal#6721](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/issues/6721)

# Summary

We propose the addition of a `:showdoc:` directive that will allow to document normally undocumented types and methods.

# Motivation

Currently, API documentation is not generated for private/protected methods/objects or C lib binding objects.

> This was originally done as these (typically) should not be used, however, this is not always the case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was originally done as these (typically) should not be used externally, however, this is not always the case.
```

When inheriting from a class that has a protected method that is intended to be implemented, it is useful
to know that method exists, and what parameters / types it has, without needing to refer to the source code.

Another use case is for libraries such as [raylib.cr](https://github.com/sol-vin/raylib-cr), where developing a

> "Crystal" interface to them using classes and structs would be prohibitive, and expose the lib bindings as part of the public API. It currently requires diving

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Crystal" interface to them using classes and structs would be prohibitive, therefore they expose the lib bindings as part of the public API. It currently requires diving
```

into the source code in order to figure out what methods are available.

# Guide-level explanation

> The `:showdoc:` directive can be added to private or protected objects, as well as C lib binding objects, to have them show up in API documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `:showdoc:` directive can be added to private or protected objects, methods, and C lib bindings, to have them show up in API documentation.
```

  # :showdoc:
  #
  # Here is some documentation for `Foo.foo`
  private def self.foo
  end
end
```

This also works for C lib, struct, enum, etc; everything in the `FooLib` namespace will be included in doc generation.

```crystal
# :showdoc:
#
# Writing documentation for code is really important and useful,
# not just for others but also your future self.
lib FooLib
  fun my_function(value : Int32) : Int32

  enum FooEnum
    Member1
    Member1
    Member3
  end

  struct FooStruct
    var_1 : Int32
    var_2 : Int32
  end
end
```

If a namespace has the `:nodoc:` directive, then the `:showdoc:` directive will have no effect on anything in its namespace.

```crystal
# :nodoc:
struct MyStruct
  # :showdoc:
  #
  # This will not show up in API docs
  struct MyStructChild
  end
end
```

# Reference-level explanation

- The parser will need to be updated to support doc comments for C lib binding objects and the `:showdoc:` directive
- The documentation generator will need to be updated to support C lib binding objects and private/protected objects
- If an object has a `:showdoc:` directive and its parent namespace is shown, then it should be shown too

TBD

# Drawbacks

TBD

> # Rationale and alternatives

Reviewer 2: Another consideration is a more generic syntax for doc metadata. This could at least to be mentioned as alternative.

There are ideas for other enhancements that could be attached to doc comments, such as section/group information (https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/issues/1312). And I think there are many more use cases, though mostly unexplored yet.

At some point it would certainly be necessary to have a more sophisticated syntax for such data markup. An insipiration could be Crystal's annotation syntax, for example.

I suppose venturing out on this would blow up the scope and put an unnecessary delay on this RFC. It's useful in itself and can be implemented quickly, without much disruption. And it builds on already existing syntax in form of `:nodoc:`.

Author: > An insipiration could be Crystal's annotation syntax

I mean `:nodoc:` and `:showdoc:` could've been built using annotations instead of comment directives, though that wouldn't work for directives like `:section:`.

Honestly the current syntax is reminiscent of rST's [field lists](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html#field-lists), could be a good source of inspiration for what we could do here.

- Feature Name: extending-api-docs
- Start Date: 2024-11-14
- RFC PR: [crystal-lang/rfcs#11](https://github.com/crystal-lang/rfcs/pull/11)
- Issue: [crystal-lang/crystal#6721](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/issues/6721)

# Summary

> We propose the addition of a `:showdoc:` directive that will allow to document normally undocumented types and methods.

Reviewer 2: **polish:** This could perhaps be a bit more expressive.
```suggestion
Introduce a `:showdoc:` directive for the doc generator which includes normally undocumented types and methods in the API documentation.
```

# Motivation

> Currently, API documentation is not generated for private/protected methods/objects or C lib binding objects.

Reviewer 2: **polish:** Perhaps it would be helpful to use a single term for documented things (methods, types, constants, macros, functions, ...). I think *"object"* fits great. Maybe we could introduce that here and mention what it refers to, and then later occurences in the text could simplify to the term "(documented) objects"? (This is already happening in some places, actually)

For example:
```diff
@@ -23,1 +23,1 @@
-The `:showdoc:` directive can be added to private or protected objects, methods, and C lib bindings, to have them show up in API documentation.
+The `:showdoc:` directive can be added to `private` or `protected` objects, and objects in `lib` bindings, to have them show up in API documentation.
```

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure about the "object" word. It's very connoted for me as type instances and has zero relationship with methods or C symbols :confused:

Reviewer 2: Maybe "features" then?

Reviewer 4: elements? constructs?

> This was originally done as these (typically) should not be used externally, however, this is not always the case.

Reviewer 2: **polish:** 
```suggestion
This was originally done as these (typically) should not be used externally. However, this is not always the case.
```

- Feature Name: extending-api-docs
- Start Date: 2024-11-14
- RFC PR: [crystal-lang/rfcs#11](https://github.com/crystal-lang/rfcs/pull/11)
- Issue: [crystal-lang/crystal#6721](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/issues/6721)

# Summary

> We propose the addition of a `:showdoc:` directive that will allow to document normally undocumented types and methods, including libs and external functions.

Reviewer 2: **polish:** The latter part feels unnecessary for the summary. I don't mind either way though.

```suggestion
We propose the addition of a `:showdoc:` directive that will allow to document normally undocumented types and methods.
```

# Motivation

Currently, API documentation is not generated for private/protected methods/objects or C lib binding objects.
This was originally done as these (typically) should not be used, however, this is not always the case.
When inheriting from a class that has a protected method that is intended to be implemented, it is useful
to know that method exists, and what parameters / types it has, without needing to refer to the source code.

Another use case is for libraries such as [raylib.cr](https://github.com/sol-vin/raylib-cr), where developing a

> "Crystal" interface to them using classes and structs would be prohibitive, and currently requires diving

Reviewer 2: **polish:** Clarify the relevance with respect to undocumented objects.

```suggestion
"Crystal" interface to them using classes and structs would be prohibitive, and expose the lib bindings as part of the public API. It currently requires diving
```

into the source code in order to figure out what methods are available.

# Guide-level explanation

The `:showdoc:` directive can be added to private or protected objects, as well as C lib binding objects, to have them show up in API documentation.

> By default, these are hidden and should only be shown if they're intended to be used directly.

Reviewer 2: **polish:** IMO _explicit_ intention to be used is more appropriate here. Or maybe I'm misinterpeting the sentence? 🤔 

```suggestion
By default, these are hidden and should only be shown if they're explicitly intended to be used.
```

In this example, when generating API documentation, `Foo.foo` will be included even though it is a private method.

```crystal
module Foo
  # :showdoc:
  private def self.foo
  end
end
```

This also works for C lib, struct, enum, etc; everything in the `FooLib` namespace will be included in doc generation.

```crystal
# :showdoc:
lib FooLib
  fun my_function(value : Int32) : Int32

  enum FooEnum
    Member1
    Member1
    Member3
  end

  struct FooStruct
    var_1 : Int32
    var_2 : Int32
  end
end
```

If a namespace has the `:nodoc:` directive, then the `:showdoc:` directive will have no effect on anything in its namespace.

```crystal
# :nodoc:
struct MyStruct

>   # This will not show up in API docs
>   # :showdoc:
>   struct MyStructChild

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** `:nodoc:` must be the first thing at the start of the comment, otherwise it has no effect.
I think the same should apply for `:showdoc:`. We should spell that out in writing and show it in the examples, maybe adding a line of doc comment below every `:showdoc:`?

The order in this example needs to be changed to be meaningful.
```suggestion
  # :showdoc:
  # This will not show up in API docs
  struct MyStructChild
```

Author: Ahh okay that's true of the existing `:nodoc:` as well. I personally prefer it being the last line but that's fine with me. We'll also need to strip this in the docs generator so it isn't printed out (if that doesn't happen already with directives).

Reviewer 2: Yeah it'll need to be stripped explicitly. Currently there is no general concept of directives, the doc generator just skips if the doc string starts with `:nodoc:` and no further processing is needed.

  end
end
```

# Reference-level explanation

- The parser will need to be updated to support doc comments for C lib binding objects and the `:showdoc:` directive
- The documentation generator will need to be updated to support C lib binding objects and private/protected objects
- If an object has a `:showdoc:` directive and its parent namespace is shown, then it should be shown too

> TBD

Reviewer 2: This seems already pretty exhaustive to me, because the subject is relatively straightforward to explain and doesn't have too much depth to it (in part because it's close analogy with the established `:nodoc:` semantics).

Technical issues are only relevant here if they affect the proposed behaviour in a way that makes parts of it unable to work.
I don't see much risks for hitting any such obstables, if there are any technical challenges the'll probably just be implementation details.

> TBD

Reviewer 3: As I said: not much. The details explained above are already a lot :)

# Drawbacks

TBD

# Rationale and alternatives

The other design that has been considered is having flags on the documentation generator itself that enable showing of private / protected objects and C lib objects in the API documentation. We chose not to go with this design as it required flags to be added at generation time, and only generated all or none (no granularity in what is shown).

This cannot be done in a library instead as it requires updates to the parser itself. This proposal makes Crystal code easier to understand, as it increases the amount and quality of API documentation.

# Prior art

There is a [PR](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pull/14816) implementing a similar feature, however it uses the generation-time flag method mentioned above, instead of the `:showdoc:` directive.

> 

Author: I've added some quick notes on what Ruby, Rust, and Elixir do for FFI bindings and private methods.
